# Data augmentation techniques for EMG signals in patients with neurogenerative diseases 

General review about Parkinson diseases can be  found [here](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8134676/)

## Data augmentation:

### 1. [Parkinson’s Disease EMG Data Augmentation and Simulation with DCGANs and Style Transfer](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7248755/)

What is the paper about:

They propose 2 new approaches to generate surface EMG signals based on 2 existing datasets.  CNN learn the signal tremor patterns, which can be applied to the new data. The augmentation is mainly dedicated to the cases, where each patient's tremors should be extended them to different sets of movement protocols. 

Code:

https://github.com/larocs/EMG-GAN, inspired by:
https://github.com/misgod/fast-neural-style-keras

Conclusion:

The paper which really corresponds to our needs. However, since PD’s tremor pattern is caused by a pathology with different intensity and manner for each patient, it is quite challenging to create such a generic mathematical model that can effectively produce an artificial signal similar to the real one.
So this is not really a general method to be applied to create new patients, however, one can imagine using it in the following way:
take different normal patients, and apply the learned tremor on their sequences.
It gives the possibility to create combinations = PD! /N!(PD-N)! of 'new' patients, where PD are the Parkinson patients in our dataset. The methods can be possibly extended for ET patients. I would try to use it in our work!

Other notes:
They use some public datasets, so I added a list of them down in the text.


### 2. [Zanini R.A., Colombini E.L., de Castro M.C.F. Parkinson’s Disease EMG Signal Prediction Using Neural Networks; Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics (SMC); Bari, Italy. 6–9 October 2019; pp. 2446–2453.](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/8914553)

What is the paper about:

Same authors as [1] earlier proposed models, for predicting Parkinson's disease electromyography (EMG) signals, to anticipate resulting resting tremor patterns.  Current work proposed to use  different neural network architectures, including MLPs, LSTM, and combined models to predict PD’s sEMG signals. The authors predict a full window of the tremor pattern based on past data (approximately 0.2s) so that it can be later used for FES control optimization. The idea is not new, for example, [3] was out earlier, but here the authors do comparison analysis of different DL architectures. Autoencoder LSTM  seems to be the most accurate model for the prediction of the EMG signal.

Conclusion:

Not really useful for us, unless we will want to try classification of the signals, not really related to data augmentation.
It gives an idea of which type of the architectures is common for this such signal processing, since they were inspired by earlier works. Shows that it is possible to combine RNNs based on Long short-termmemory (LSTM) and multilayer perceptron (MLP) networks to recognize patterns and classify different movements efﬁciently.  



###  3. [Synthetic Biological Signals Machine-generated by GPT-2 improve the Classification of EEG and EMG through Data Augmentation](http://jordanjamesbird.com/publications/Synthetic-Biological-Signals-Machine-Generated-by-GPT-2-Improve-the-Classification-of-EEG-and-EMG-Through-Data-Augmentation.pdf)

What is the paper about:
Authors  show  that multiple GPT-2 models can machine-generate synthetic biological signals (EMG and EEG) and improve real
data classification. They demonstrate that  models trained on GPT-2 EMG data can classify real EMG data at 78.24% accuracy. If adding the generated data to the real data,  the Random Forest classifying EMG increases from 93.62% (0.8) to 93.9%
(0.59) when training data is augmented by synthetic EMG signals.
Language model used to produce a continuous synthetic raw signal based on the previous time data.
The authors used EMG data corresponding to the opening and closing movements of the right hand were
collected from fifteen able-bodied participants (9 male, 6 female, mean age 26) using a Thalmic Labs Myo armband.
For classification, different statistical feautres are extracted from real and synthetic signals.  Features are extracted from a sliding window of 1 second in length, at an overlap of 0.5
seconds. As the models, they selected Support Vector Machine (SVM), Random Forest (RF), K-Nearest Neighbours (KNN, K = 10), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), Logistic Regression (LR), and Gaussian Naıve Bayes (GNB). 


Code:
Feature extraction code available at
https://github.com/jordan-bird/eeg-feature-generation
Example code can be found at: https://github.com/jordan-bird/Generational-Loop-GPT2



Conclusion:

Their results are actually not very impressive for EMG signals.  EMG
data, where the GPT-2 generated waves are seemingly less natural than their human counterparts; although natural wave patterns do emerge, they are more erratic and prone to spiking unlike the signals recorded from a human forearm. The model used is extremely complex, so it has a big potential, but it is hard to train. However, thiswork shows that synthetic biosignals generated by an attention-based transformer hold useful information towards improving several learning algorithms for classification of
real biological signal data. 

What we can do is to use the features they use for EMG data classification.
What I also want to do is to try to train their model on our data, just to get more familiar with the model training etc, and to uderstand it better.


### 4. [Signal processing approaches to minimize or suppress calibration time in oscillatory activity-based brain–computer interfaces](https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01159171/document)

What is this paper about:

Lotte et al. proposed a method of ”Artificial Trial Generation
Based on Analogy” where three EEG data examples x1, x2, x3 provide examples and an artificial xsynthetic is formed which is to x3 what x2 is to x1. A transformation is applied to x1 to make
it more similar to x2, the same transformation is then applied to x3 which generates xsynthetic_1. (In
other words, we compute the analogy between A and B, and create a data D which has the same analogy to C.). This approach was shown to improve performance of a Linear Discriminant Analysis classifier on three different datasets.
In the same paper, they propose another  simple approach to ADG is to first divide each training EEG trial into several segments, and then generate new artificial trials as a concatenation of segments
coming from different and randomly selected training trials from the same class. This one is done both in time and frequency domains.

Conclusion:
The method mentionned in the review of literature in  paper 3. The authors mention that even the simple augmentation methods gives improvements in their experiments.

### 5. [HS-CNN: a CNN with hybrid convolution scale for EEG motor imagery classification] (https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1741-2552/ab405f)


What is this paper about:

Dai et al.  performed similar to [4] rearrangements of waveform components in both the
time and frequency domains to add three times the amount of initially collected EEG data, finding that this approach could improve the  EEG motor imagery classification accuracy of a Hybrid Scale Convolutional Neural Network. This work showed that data augmentation allowed the model to improve the classification of data
for individual subjects that were specifically challenging in terms of the model’s classification ability.


Conclusion:
The method mentionned in the review of literature in  paper 3. The paper seems to be interesting by the abstract, since they also use a CNN for the classification, and they convert the signal to an image.
#TODO: to find and check this one in details

### 6 [A New Method to Generate Artificial Frames Using the Empirical Mode Decomposition for an EEG-Based Motor Imagery BCI] (https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnins.2018.00308/full)

Dinares-Ferran et al. decomposed EEG signals into Intrinsic Mode Functions and
constructed synthetic data frames by arranging these IMFs into new combinations, demonstrating improvements of classification performance of motor imagery based BCIs while including these new signals.
The proposed method is based on Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD). 

Conclusion:

Original method. The Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD) method is based on an algorithm that allows users to conduct a data-driven analysis that is more fitting with non-stationary signals that have changes in the frequency structure within a short period of time.

## Datasets:

1. The dataset consists of 18 different record sets, each one with 116,000 data points (approximately 60 s), acquired from multiple sessions from five patients, one diagnosed with Essential Tremor (ET) and four diagnosed with PD according to UK Parkinson’s Disease Society Brain Bank Clinical Diagnostic Criteria. EMG signals were collected from wrist extensor and flexor muscles with a 2 kHz Delsys Trigno™EMG system (DELSYS INCORPORATED, Natick, MA, USA). (Zanini R.A., Colombini E.L., de Castro M.C.F. Parkinson’s Disease EMG Signal Prediction Using Neural Networks; Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics (SMC); Bari, Italy. 6–9 October 2019; pp. 2446–2453. [Google Schoslar] [Ref list])

2. http://ninapro.hevs.ch/




## Parkinson features

Just some pieces of information about Parkinson disease features others used.

Diagnosis of Parkinson’s Disease from EEG signals using Linearand Self-Similarity features
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/336287756_Diagnosis_of_Parkinson's_Disease_from_EEG_signals_using_Linear_and_Self-Similarity_features

Two time-domain features for EEG signals, which gives 100% accuracy for early Parkinson diagnostics according to the authors.  The features are:  correlation coefﬁcients(CC) and linear predictive coefﬁcients (LPC).

### About tremor charcteristics
Tremor pattern, amplitude, and frequency varies frompatient to patient;•Tremor magnitude and frequencies vary during the dayaccording to levels of levodopa and other medicationsconsumed by the patient, and•Tremor and muscle-stimulus vary according to move-ment patterns